# Custom Browse/Search Column Example Plugin
In order to add a custom browse/search column follow the steps below.
1. Create a view of what will go in the cell with the name \_*custom_column_name*\_cell.html.erb. In this file you can access the records fields through the variable *record*. This view file should go in frontend/views/*record_type* where record type is the type of record type you are adding the column for. If you want to add the column as an option for multiple record types, put the file in frontend/views/search instead. (Note that if your column is a field that exists within the index you may not need to create a view if you are happy with the default formating.)
2. Add translation files with a translation for search.*record_type*.*custom_column_name*. If you are adding the column as an option for multiple record types, you will need to add a translation for each of those recored types.
3. Add a file called search_browse_column_plugin_config.rb in the top level plugin directory. In this file you should define any additional column options you want. Once again, add an entry for each of the record types you want to add the column to. You can also specify columns you wish to remove as options.
4. You have now successfully added an additional option for a browse/search column. If you added it to one of the record types that that the end user can set browse/search columns for (i.e. resource, accession, digital_object, multi), then it will now appear as an option to the user.

**Note that removing columns or adding custom columns and then later removing them could cause ArchivesSpace not to work correctly since some users may have selected the custom column in preferences. The easiest way to fix this would be to wipe out the preference table, but this would make users lose any preference setting they had set. For this reason, you should take care when adding custom columns to a production instance of ArchivesSpace.**